🧠 Option 1: Use a Smaller Semantic Subspace (Pre-filter)

Instead of searching the whole space:

    First cluster your paper embeddings using k-means (or use topic labels / FOS).

    When the user enters a paragraph:

        Use an LLM or BERTopic to detect topic.

        Restrict HNSW search only to papers in that cluster or topic.

        Query HNSW only on that subset.

✅ Pros: Significant memory drop
⚠️ Cons: Need to preprocess clusters or topic labels
🤖 Option 2: Use an LLM for First-Level Filtering

Use an LLM (e.g., MiniLM, DistilBERT) to:

    Detect the intent/topic from the paragraph.

    Retrieve top-N relevant topics or FOS.

    Only then, search for papers with matching FOS/topic, or limit HNSW to those papers.

✅ Pros: High-quality contextual understanding
⚠️ Cons: Needs FOS/topic labels per paper, but you already have that.
💾 Option 3: Use Approximate or Compressed Embeddings

You can:

    Reduce dimensionality of embeddings via PCA (e.g., 1536 → 384).

    Or switch to smaller models like MiniLM.

from sklearn.decomposition import PCA
reduced = PCA(n_components=384).fit_transform(embeddings)

✅ Pros: Save memory
⚠️ Cons: Some semantic loss
🔄 Option 4: Replace HNSWLib with FAISS + GPU / on-demand index

FAISS (Facebook’s ANN lib) supports GPU or streaming modes.

import faiss
index = faiss.IndexFlatIP(dim)  # for cosine, use normalized vectors
index.add(embeddings)

✅ Pros: Scalable, less crashy
⚠️ Cons: May need conversion, and not as fast for exact matches
✅ Recommended Hybrid Setup (Best Balance)

    Use BERTopic or LLM to extract dominant topic from paragraph.

    Precompute topic labels for papers (you already did).

    Query only papers within the same topic (i.e., subset HNSW index).

    Fall back to symbolic reasoning if embedding fails.

This is what your system was already planning:

    writing monitor → topic classifier → filter papers → rerank via embedding

So yes — adding LLM + topic reasoning absolutely helps, and pre-filtering the vector index (semantic subspace search) is the most memory-efficient fix.